Closing and draining tidy (#3988)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-transport.md

An endpoint enters a closing period after initiating an immediate close;
{{immediate-close}}.

During the closing period, an endpoint that sends a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame
SHOULD respond to any incoming packet that can be decrypted with another packet
containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame. An endpoint that is closing is not
required to process the frames contained in packets. Such an endpoint SHOULD
limit the number of packets it generates containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.
For instance, an endpoint could wait for a progressively increasing number of
received packets or amount of time before responding to received packets.

In the closing state, an endpoint retains only enough information to generate a
packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and to identify packets as belonging
to the connection. The endpoint's selected connection ID and the QUIC version
are sufficient information to identify packets for a closing connection; an
endpoint can discard all other connection state. An endpoint MAY retain packet
protection keys for incoming packets to allow it to read and process a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.

An endpoint MAY drop packet protection keys when starting the closing period

> and send a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE in response to any UDP datagram

Author: This changes to use MAY instead of "is allowed to".

Otherwise, this changes only to remove the self-reference (and s/entering/starting).

implicitly reset.

After sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, an endpoint immediately enters the
closing state; see {{closing}}. After receiving a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame,
endpoints enter the draining state; see {{draining}}.

An immediate close can be used after an application protocol has arranged to

> close a connection.  This might be after the application protocols negotiates a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
close a connection.  This might be after the application protocol negotiates a
```

> graceful shutdown.  The application protocol exchanges whatever messages that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
graceful shutdown.  The application protocol can exchange messages that
```

> are needed to cause both endpoints to agree to close the connection, after which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are needed for both application endpoints to agree that the connection can be closed, after which
```

> the application requests that the connection be closed.  When the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the application requests that QUIC close the connection.  When QUIC consequently
```

> closes the connection, a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an appropriate error code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
closes the connection, a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an application-supplied error code
```

> will be used to signal closure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will be used to signal closure to the peer.
```

The closing and draining connection states exist to ensure that connections
close cleanly and that delayed or reordered packets are properly discarded.
These states SHOULD persist for at least three times the current Probe Timeout
(PTO) interval as defined in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

Disposing of connection state prior to exiting the closing or draining state

> could cause could result in an generating unnecessary stateless reset in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
could cause could result in an endpoint generating a stateless reset unnecessarily when
```

> response to receiving a packet.  Endpoints that have some alternative means to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it receives a late-arriving packet.  Endpoints that have some alternative means to
```

ensure that late-arriving packets do not induce a response, such as those that
are able to close the UDP socket, MAY end these states earlier to allow for
faster resource recovery.  Servers that retain an open socket for accepting new
connections SHOULD NOT end the closing or draining states early.

> Once the closing or draining state ends, an endpoint SHOULD discard all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once its closing or draining state ends, an endpoint SHOULD discard all
```

> connection state.  An endpoint MAY send a stateless reset in response

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connection state.  The endpoint MAY send a stateless reset in response
```

> to any further incoming packets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to any further incoming packets belonging to this connection.
```

### Closing Connection State {#closing}

> An endpoint enters a closing state after initiating an immediate close.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An endpoint enters the closing state after initiating an immediate close.
```

In the closing state, an endpoint retains only enough information to generate a
packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and to identify packets as belonging
to the connection. An endpoint in the closing state sends a packet containing a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in response to any incoming packet that it attributes to
the connection.

An endpoint SHOULD limit the rate at which it generates packets in the closing
state. For instance, an endpoint could wait for a progressively increasing
number of received packets or amount of time before responding to received
packets.

> The endpoint's selected connection ID and the QUIC version are sufficient

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An endpoint's selected connection ID and the QUIC version are sufficient
```

> information to identify packets for a closing connection; an endpoint MAY

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information to identify packets for a closing connection; the endpoint MAY
```

discard all other connection state. An endpoint that is closing is not required

> to process the frames contained in packets. An endpoint MAY retain packet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to process any received frame. An endpoint MAY retain packet
```

All frames are in packets.

protection keys for incoming packets to allow it to read and process a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.

An endpoint MAY drop packet protection keys when entering the closing state

> and send a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE in response to any UDP datagram

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and send a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in response to any UDP datagram
```

that is received. However, an endpoint that discards packet protection keys
cannot identify and discard invalid packets. To avoid being used for an
amplication attack, such endpoints MUST limit the cumulative size of packets

> containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame to 3 times the cumulative size of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it sends to three times the cumulative size of the
```

> packets that cause those packets to be sent. To minimize the state that an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packets that are received and attributed to the connection. To minimize the state that an
```

endpoint maintains for a closing connection, endpoints MAY send the exact same

> packet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
packet in response to any received packet.
```

implicitly reset.

After sending a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, an endpoint immediately enters the
closing state; see {{closing}}. After receiving a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame,
endpoints enter the draining state; see {{draining}}.

An immediate close can be used after an application protocol has arranged to
close a connection.  This might be after the application protocols negotiates a
graceful shutdown.  The application protocol exchanges whatever messages that
are needed to cause both endpoints to agree to close the connection, after which
the application requests that the connection be closed.  When the application
closes the connection, a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame with an appropriate error code
will be used to signal closure.

The closing and draining connection states exist to ensure that connections
close cleanly and that delayed or reordered packets are properly discarded.
These states SHOULD persist for at least three times the current Probe Timeout
(PTO) interval as defined in {{QUIC-RECOVERY}}.

> Disposing of connection state prior to the exiting the closing or draining state

Reviewer 3: `prior to the exiting the closing or draining state` I can't parse this. Is a comma missing or are there added/missing word?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Disposing of connection state prior to exiting the closing or draining state
```

> could cause delayed or reordered packets to generate an unnecessary stateless

Reviewer 4: Given the situation, I believe reordered is correct.
```suggestion
could cause reordered packets to generate an unnecessary stateless
```

Author: Let's say that you send CONNECTION_CLOSE then drop state immediately.  It's not clear whether packets you subsequently receive are the result of the peer just sending, delays, or reordering.  Maybe we can just say "packets":

> [...] could result in an generating unnecessary stateless reset in response to receiving a packet.

Reviewer 4: Sure, the new text works I think.

reset. Endpoints that have some alternative means to ensure that late-arriving

> packets on the connection do not induce a response, such as those that are able

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
packets do not induce a response, such as those that are able
```

to close the UDP socket, MAY end these states earlier to allow
for faster resource recovery.  Servers that retain an open socket for accepting
new connections SHOULD NOT end the closing or draining states early.

Once the closing or draining state ends, an endpoint SHOULD discard all
connection state.  This results in new packets on the connection being handled

> generically.  For instance, an endpoint MAY send a stateless reset in response

Reviewer 4: This sentence is not very helpful, so I'd remove it unless you have a better suggestion.

> connection state.  This results in new packets on the connection being handled
> generically.  For instance, an endpoint MAY send a stateless reset in response

Reviewer 4: This sentence is not very helpful, so I'd remove it unless you have a better suggestion.
```suggestion
connection state.  An endpoint MAY send a stateless reset in response
```

> to any further incoming packets.

Author: This stuff is mostly just reordered.  The main change is to  talk about states rather than periods, for consistency reasons.

### Closing Connection State {#closing}

> An endpoint enters a closing state after initiating an immediate close.

Author: Removed a self-reference here, that's all.

In the closing state, an endpoint retains only enough information to generate a
packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and to identify packets as belonging
to the connection. An endpoint in the closing state sends a packet containing a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame in response to any incoming packet that it attributes to
the connection.

An endpoint SHOULD limit the rate at which it generates packets in the closing
state. For instance, an endpoint could wait for a progressively increasing
number of received packets or amount of time before responding to received
packets.

The endpoint's selected connection ID and the QUIC version are sufficient
information to identify packets for a closing connection; an endpoint MAY
discard all other connection state. An endpoint that is closing is not required
to process the frames contained in packets. An endpoint MAY retain packet
protection keys for incoming packets to allow it to read and process a

> CONNECTION_CLOSE frame.

Author: This is factored fairly heavily.

An endpoint MAY drop packet protection keys when entering the closing state
and send a packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE in response to any UDP datagram
that is received. However, an endpoint that discards packet protection keys
cannot identify and discard invalid packets. To avoid being used for an
amplication attack, such endpoints MUST limit the cumulative size of packets
containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame to 3 times the cumulative size of the
packets that cause those packets to be sent. To minimize the state that an
endpoint maintains for a closing connection, endpoints MAY send the exact same

> packet.

Author: This is only factored lightly:

use MAY in place of "is allowed to"

use state instead of period

remove self-reference

  congestion control, which are not expected to be relevant for a closed
  connection. Retransmitting the final packet requires less state.

While in the closing period, an endpoint could receive packets from a new
source address, indicating a connection migration; see {{migration}}. New
packets from unverified addresses could be used to create an amplification
attack; see {{address-validation}}. To avoid being used for an amplication
attack, an endpoint in the closing state MUST either discard packets received
from unvalidated addresses or limit the cumulative size of packets it sends to
unvalidated addresses to 3 times the size of packets it receives from the

> address.

Author: This required a little better alignment with the other text above.  The sentence "To avoid being used for an amplification attack" is now the same in both places.

An endpoint is not expected to handle key updates when it is closing. A key
update might prevent the endpoint from moving from the closing state to
draining, but it otherwise has no impact.

### Draining Connection State {#draining}

The draining state is entered once an endpoint receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE
frame, which indicates that its peer is closing or draining. While otherwise
identical to the closing state, an endpoint in the draining state MUST NOT send
any packets. Retaining packet protection keys is unnecessary once a connection

> is in the draining state.

Author: We used to think that you could enter draining as a result of a stateless reset or idle timeout.  That is no longer the case, so this just mentions CONNECTION_CLOSE directly.

An endpoint that receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame MAY send a single packet
containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame before entering the draining state, using a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and a NO_ERROR code if appropriate.  An endpoint MUST NOT
send further packets, which could result in a constant exchange of
CONNECTION_CLOSE frames until the closing period on either peer ended.

An endpoint MAY transition from the closing period to the draining period if it
receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame or stateless reset, either of which indicate
that the peer is also closing or draining.  The draining period SHOULD end when
the closing period would have ended.  In other words, the endpoint can use the
same end time, but cease retransmission of the closing packet.

> ### Terminal Connection State

Author: This stuff is awkward.  I will move it up into the introductory part instead.

  congestion control, which are not expected to be relevant for a closed
  connection. Retransmitting the final packet requires less state.

While in the closing state, an endpoint could receive packets from a new source
address, possibly indicating a connection migration; see {{migration}}.  An
endpoint in the closing state MUST either discard packets received from

> unvalidated addresses or limit the cumulative size of packets it sends to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an unvalidated address or limit the cumulative size of packets it sends to
```

> unvalidated addresses to 3 times the size of packets it receives from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an unvalidated address to three times the size of packets it receives from that
```

address.

> An endpoint is not expected to handle key updates when it is closing. A key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An endpoint is not expected to handle key updates when it is closing (Section 6 of {{QUIC-TLS}}). A key
```

update might prevent the endpoint from moving from the closing state to

> draining, but it otherwise has no impact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the draining state, but it otherwise has no impact.
```

> the draining state, but it otherwise has no impact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the draining state, since the endpoint will not be able to process subsequently received packets, but it otherwise has no impact.
```

### Draining Connection State {#draining}

The draining state is entered once an endpoint receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE
frame, which indicates that its peer is closing or draining. While otherwise
identical to the closing state, an endpoint in the draining state MUST NOT send
any packets. Retaining packet protection keys is unnecessary once a connection
is in the draining state.

An endpoint that receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame MAY send a single packet

> containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame before entering the draining state, using a
> CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and a NO_ERROR code if appropriate.  An endpoint MUST NOT

Reviewer 2: Existing text, but "single packet containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame ... using a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame" seems redundant.
```suggestion
containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame before entering the draining state, using a
NO_ERROR code if appropriate.  An endpoint MUST NOT
```

> NO_ERROR code if appropriate.  An endpoint MUST NOT send further packets, which
> could result in a constant exchange of CONNECTION_CLOSE frames until either
> endpoint exits the closing state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NO_ERROR code if appropriate.  An endpoint MUST NOT send further packets. Doing so
could result in a constant exchange of CONNECTION_CLOSE frames until one of the
endpoints exits the closing state.
```

> An endpoint MAY transition from the closing state to the draining state if it
> receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, which indicates that the peer is also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An endpoint MAY enter the draining state from the closing state if it
receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, which indicates that the peer is also
```

closing or draining. In this case, the draining state SHOULD end when the
closing state would have ended. In other words, the endpoint uses the same end

> time, but ceases retransmission of the closing packet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time, but ceases transmission of any packets on this connection.
```

  congestion control, which are not expected to be relevant for a closed
  connection. Retransmitting the final packet requires less state.

> While in the closing state, an endpoint could receive packets from a new
> source address, indicating a connection migration; see {{migration}}. An
> endpoint that discards information about validated addresses might be used to
> create an amplification attack; see {{address-validation}}. To avoid being used
> for an amplication attack, an endpoint in the closing state MUST either discard
> packets received from unvalidated addresses or limit the cumulative size of
> packets it sends to unvalidated addresses to 3 times the size of packets it
> receives from the address.

Reviewer 4: Given other path migration constraints, this text seems odd.  It's possible it could be fully removed.

```suggestion
While in the closing state, an endpoint could receive packets from a new
source address, possibly indicating a connection migration; see {{migration}}.
An endpoint in the closing state MUST either discard packets received from
unvalidated addresses or limit the cumulative size of packets it sends to
unvalidated addresses to 3 times the size of packets it receives from the address.
```

An endpoint is not expected to handle key updates when it is closing. A key
update might prevent the endpoint from moving from the closing state to
draining, but it otherwise has no impact.

### Draining Connection State {#draining}

The draining state is entered once an endpoint receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE
frame, which indicates that its peer is closing or draining. While otherwise
identical to the closing state, an endpoint in the draining state MUST NOT send
any packets. Retaining packet protection keys is unnecessary once a connection
is in the draining state.

An endpoint that receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame MAY send a single packet
containing a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame before entering the draining state, using a
CONNECTION_CLOSE frame and a NO_ERROR code if appropriate.  An endpoint MUST NOT
send further packets, which could result in a constant exchange of
CONNECTION_CLOSE frames until either endpoint exits the closing state.

An endpoint MAY transition from the closing state to the draining state if it

> receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame or stateless reset, either of which indicate

Author: This is wrong.  I'll fix that.

closing or draining. In this case, the draining state SHOULD end when the
closing state would have ended. In other words, the endpoint uses the same end

> time, but cease retransmission of the closing packet.

Author: This bit used to say that you entered draining after getting a stateless reset, which was just flat wrong.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An endpoint MAY transition from the closing state to the draining state if it
receives a CONNECTION_CLOSE frame, which indicates that the peer is also
closing or draining. In this case, the draining state SHOULD end when the
closing state would have ended. In other words, the endpoint uses the same end
time, but ceases retransmission of the closing packet.
```
